---
title: ""
permalink: /research/
author_profile: true
---
Research
======


# <span style="color:#52adc8"> Publications </span>
## López Blanco, J.D. Do languages open doors? A theoretical model of linguistic capital and (im)mobility and its application in Spanish youth migration
<details>
<summary>Read more</summary>
Language skills have demonstrated their significance in migration decisions; however, their role as a potential cause of immobility has been largely overlooked. In this paper, I first propose a theoretical model that seeks to explain decisions regarding mobility and immobility based on the instrumental returns generated by an individual’s linguistic capital within a given opportunity structure. Secondly, I apply this model utilizing data from university and vocational training graduates in Spain. Leveraging its particularity as a case study, which encompasses five regions where a minority’s co-official language is an integral part of ethnic identification and shares a similar institutional environment that encourages its use, I find that bilingualism is primarily linked to internal immobility. Simultaneously, it affects the direction of internal migration, since bilinguals are more inclined to relocate to areas with similar language conditions.
Bilingualism also presents indirect effects. The results indicate that bilingualism influences international migration by facilitating the acquisition of a foreign language, which becomes increasingly attainable as the cost of language acquisition
decreases, though the effect remains relatively small.


  - <i>Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies, DOI: 10.1080/1369183X.2024.2359676 </i>. 
  
</details>
<br>

# <span style="color:#52adc8"> Working papers </span>


## López Blanco, J.D. Not What, but Where: The Labour Market Returns of Intra-European Migrant Returnees and Internal Migrants in Spain
<details>

<summary>Read more</summary>
This study contributes to the economic sociology of return migration by investigating how returnees leverage internationally acquired resources for economic success in their home countries. By providing a nuanced comparative analysis of human capital utilisation among nonmigrants, internal migrants, and international returnees, this research sheds light on the multifaceted nature of Spanish return migration in the context of the post-2008 economic crisis. Our findings challenge conventional wisdom about the value of transnational human capital acquisition, while internal migrants generally enjoy consistent advantages in terms of earnings, occupational status, and labour market participation and employment, return migrants encounter more heterogeneous outcomes. Specifically, the economic benefits for return migrants are significantly shaped by individual migration histories, the duration and frequency of their stays abroad, and their reintegration contexts upon returning to Spain. Furthermore, this study highlights the critical role of geographic and social contexts, particularly the influence of internal relocation after returning or the advantage of multiple migrations, on the labour market outcomes of returnees. By advancing the understanding of the economic and social implications of return and internal migration, this study calls for a more comprehensive and empathetic understanding of the complex tapestry of spatial (im)mobilities and its impacts on individuals' lives and societal structure.
  
 - <i>>Pre-print available: https://osf.io/preprints/socarxiv/c6pqk/ </i>. 

</details>
<br>


## López Blanco, J.D. Internal and International Migration in “Schengenland”. Selectivity of the young Spanish migration
<details>

<summary>Read more</summary>
The  study  of  the  links  between  internal  and  international  migration  has  traditionally  been  neglected  in
migration research. This gap is even more striking in the case of the countries of the European Union, as the policy
of free movement and the creation of a common labour market have placed intra-European mobility in a liminal
state:  neither an unlimited space of free movement nor a classic example of cross-border restrictions.  This paper
addresses the question of whether - and how - intra-European migration differs from internal migration in terms
of migration selectivity.  It does so by using comparable micro-level survey data from a representative sample
of Spanish graduates and vocational trainees.  The results show that internal and intra-European migration are
positively selected with respect to education and that the strength of the selection mechanism is similar for them,
especially compared to non-European international migration,  where positive selection is stronger.  They also
show that the nature of each resource influences migration decisions,  as its transferability or location-specific
utility determines which migration path is chosen. Finally, the results also highlight the important role of regional
inequality in determining selectivity among migration projects.
  
 - <i>Pre-print available: https://osf.io/preprints/socarxiv/btxqn/ </i>. 

</details>
<br>




## López Blanco, J.D. Beyond National Borders and Regional Boundaries: Labor Market Integration Patterns in Spanish Internal and International Migration
<details>
<summary>Read more</summary>
This study analyses labour market integration among internal and international migrants from Spain, challenging the traditional division in migration studies. It focuses on how the selection and mediation mechanisms of migrants influence their labour market outcomes and the role of primary migration motivations in the assimilation process over time. Results show similar selection mechanisms for both migrant groups, with international migrants achieving better labour market integration. For international migrants, occupational status relates more to their field of study, whereas for internal migrants, most of their “migrant return” comes from achieving better labour market conditions. Economic migrants fare better in labour integration, but those migrating without a job often end up in lower-status jobs, especially for international migrants. Host language skills affects international migrants, with its impact on internal migrants in bilingual regions being ambiguous. The study underlines parallels in the labour market experiences of both migrant types, urging a unified approach to understanding human mobility.

  - <i>Draft available upon request </i>. 
  
</details>
<br>


# <span style="color:#52adc8"> In preparation </span>


## López Blanco, J.D. and Nadaraia, K. When Poverty comes in at the Door, Love flies out at the Window. The Mediated Effect of Income on Fertility Intentions and their Realization in Couples
<details>
<summary>Read more</summary>
In development

</details>
<br>

